# Final Project Proposal

1. **Leading Question:** Using the data available in open flights, we will seek to determine the 'importance' of certain airports. That is, we will characterize airports in the world (or a more specific region, like North America, Asia, etc, or even within just a country) by their centrality in that region. We will also find optimal routes between airports (in terms of distance, not nessecarily real travel time). This will yield insight into the operation of flight networks.

2. **Dataset Acquisition:** We are getting our data from [openflights.org](https://openflights.org/data.html). We will download two raw text files for the airports which will be our nodes (airports.dat),
and then the routes (routes.dat), which will be our directed edges. The data for both documents consists of comma-seperated values on each line,which describe either an airport or a route. Airports have their IATA and ICAO identifiers (international standards), a unique OpenFlights ID, their name, city, and country, local timezone in hours off UTC, and geographic data (lat, log, & alt), while routes list first their airline, unique OpenFlights ID. source airport, then their destination airport, and other data.
Parsing this data consists just of moving line-by-line and extracting the data we need (which is not all of it, see below) into a Node/Airport or Route/Edge struct.
Each node will represent an airport and store its unique OpenFlights ID, name, and coordinates in a tuple.
Each edge will represent a one-way route from one airport to another and store the its length, which can be calculated from the coordinates of the two airports (altitude is going to be ignored as it is generally insignificant in added distance compared to the length of the flight). This length will form the weight of the edge.
So as to be able to visualize our dataset and the modifications we make to it, we would like to use the cs225 PNG class if possible, as we are familiar with using it. This will entail drawing the graph on a blank PNG, with the ability to represent airports and routes of interest clearly (for example, with a different color than other graph elements).

3. **Graph Algorithms:** We are planning on two main algorithms and a traversal. The traversal will simply be a Breadth First Search Traversal, which will be O(n). This will chiefly be a sanity-check to make sure we have correctly created a graph structure, as the traversal itself is not difficult to implement.
For our algorithms, we will have a shortest path algorithm that will allow us to input two airports, and return the shortest path between the two airports which will represent the best path to get to each airport. We will most likely use Floyd-Warshall's Algorithm which is O(n<sup>3</sup>).
We will also implement a betweeness centrality algorithm to determine which airports are the most important to the world which runs in O(n*m), which will be the capstone of the project.

4. **Timeline:** We will have all the setup for the program by 11/19 at the end of the day; this means data acquisition and refining, data representation, and basic testing for this. Everything should be in place at this point to implement the algorithms on top of.
For the midd project checkin on 12/1, we will have the basics of each algorithm done. This means they all work and are tested thoroughly. The next week will be spent cleaning up the code base, and adding any final touches on top of the base algorithms.
The final week (12/5-12/11) will be spent writing the report and doing the presentation so that it is ready to sumbit on the 13th.